Parkinson's Tie to Impulsiveness Studied

Your brain is supposed to fire a "hold your horses" signal when faced with a
tough choice. But a brain implant that stops the tremors of Parkinson's disease
may block that signal — a new explanation for why some Parkinson's patients
become hugely impulsive.

Scientists have long known that anti-Parkinson medications occasionally spark
compulsions like pathological gambling.

Research published Thursday found another treatment, a pacemaker-like brain
implant, can trigger a completely different kind of impulsiveness.

How different? The drugs leave a subset of patients unlikely to learn from bad
experiences, like a losing poker hand.

The brain implant doesn't hinder learning. In contrast, those patients can make
hasty decisions as the brain loses its automatic tendency to hesitate when faced
with conflict, University of Arizona researchers reported online in the journal
Science.

In fact, the first patient they studied displayed an alarming example when he
saw something across the room he wanted and tried to dash over without his
wheelchair. Neuroscientist Michael Frank had to catch the man before he fell.

"Deep brain stimulation," or DBS, involves placing electrodes into a small
region called the subthalamic nucleus, an area important for controlling
movement. But it also is where scientists believe the brain yells: "Stop, weigh
your options!"

Frank's theory: When electrodes fire to disrupt excessive movement, they also
may block that signal.

"It makes a lot of sense," said Dr. Valerie Voon, a psychiatrist with the
National Institutes of Health's neurology center, after reviewing the research.

The study doesn't offer easy solutions. But it could affect how neurologists
counsel Parkinson's patients after DBS surgery.

"Because they don't have those brakes in place, you need to teach someone to
slow down" when faced with certain decisions, Voon said.

At least 1 million Americans have Parkinson's, suffering increasingly severe
tremors and periodically stiff or frozen limbs as brain cells quit producing
dopamine, a chemical crucial for movement. There is no cure. Standard treatments
include medications to stimulate dopamine and, once those fail, DBS surgery to
control tremors.

Doctors have long noticed varying degrees of impulsiveness in Parkinson's
patients, from making uncensored remarks to rare cases of extreme behavior such
as compulsive gambling, shopping, eating or sex. Changing medications or doses
often solves extreme symptoms _ if patients or their families report the
worrisome behavior.

Frank wondered what role the brain implant plays.

His team used specialized computer games to probe decision-making in 15
Parkinson's patients taking dopamine drugs, 17 others who received DBS, and 14
healthy older adults.

First, participants were shown pairs of Japanese characters and told to pick the
"correct" one. It was baffling — what makes one symbol better, especially if you
don't know Japanese? But as the computer screen beamed back "Correct!" or
"Incorrect!" their brains learned to prefer some characters over others.

Then Frank paired the symbols differently: "Correct" ones together to simulate
"win-win" decisions; "incorrect" pairings to model choosing the lesser of two
evils; and easy "right-wrong" pairs.

Healthy people and Parkinson's patients on dopamine drugs hesitated briefly when
faced with win-win or lose-lose choices, allowing time to weigh options. But DBS
patients didn't hesitate with lose-lose choices _ and actually sped up win-win
decisions.

Remarkably, switch off the brain implant and DBS patients quit rushing the close
calls.

As in previous research, medicated patients were less likely to learn which
"wrong" symbols to avoid, backing the theory that dopamine drugs can hinder
learning from negative feedback.

But do the DBS patients' hasty choices really matter in a win-win situation,
where there's no clearly wrong answer?

In the real world, definitely, said Arizona's Frank. Say your job offers a range
of 401K options. Sure, any one is better than no investment, but just grabbing
the first one might not be the most lucrative.

It hasn't been obvious that different treatments cause different impulsive
behaviors, said Dr. Kathleen Shannon of Chicago's Rush University Hospital.

"They all seem to make bad decisions and have trouble making decisions," she
said. Now, "I'll start to look at my patients differently."