Baby seats recalled after 28 head injury reports

Consumers should never put Bumbo Baby Sitter Seats on an elevated surface or
leave children unattended, the Consumer Product Safety Commission warns.

About 1 million baby seats sold at major U.S. retailers are being recalled after
the Consumer Product Safety Commission received 28 reports of serious head
injuries, including three skull fractures, after young children fell out of the
seats when they were placed on tables.

Improper use of the Bumbo Baby Sitter Seats, manufactured by South African
company Bumbo International, could lead to serious head injuries if placed on
any elevated surface. Young children could arch their backs, flip out of the
seat and fall onto the floor, the agency warned Thursday.

The seats were sold at Target (Charts, Fortune 500), Wal-Mart (Charts, Fortune
500), Sears (Charts, Fortune 500), Kmart, Toys 'R' Us, Babies 'R' Us, USA
Babies and other toy and children's stores nationwide and online from August
2003 through October 2007 for about $40.

The bottom of the molded foam children's seat is round and flat with a diameter
of about 15 inches and comes in yellow, blue, purple, pink, aqua and lime green.
The seat has leg holes and a seat back that wraps completely around the child.
The front of the seat reads "Bumbo" in raised lettering with the image of an
elephant on top. 

Mattel recalls more toys on lead concerns

The bottom of the seat has a warning label that reads: "Never use on a raised
surface. Never use as a car seat or bath seat. Designed for floor level use
only. Never leave your baby unattended as the seat is not designed to be totally
restrictive and may not prevent release of your baby in the event of vigorous
movement."

The Consumer Product Safety Commission warns that consumers should never use the
infant seat on a table, countertop, chair or other elevated surface.

Consumers can contact Bumbo to obtain new warning label stickers and
instructions at (877) 932-8626. The agency also says consumers should use the
Bumbo seat at ground level but should never leave a child unattended.